# Information on PROTEX

## Overall background
PROduction-To-EXposure (PROTEX) is a modular, mechanistic, and generic modeling framework designed to simulate the entire life cycle of a chemical, i.e., from industrial production (“Production”) to its eventual presence in the human body following exposure (“Exposure”). PROTEX consists of four interconnected modules: (Module 1) A technosphere module simulates the time-variant accumulation, mass flows, and multimedia emissions of a chemical during industrial processes, indoor and outdoor use phases (“in-use stocks”), and end-of-life disposal (“waste stock”) of consumer articles, i.e., the human socioeconomic system. (Module 2) A chemical fate and transport module simulates time-variant chemical concentrations in different homogeneous, well-mixing environmental media (e.g., air, surface and subsurface water, soil, sediment, vegetation, artificial surfaces, etc.) of nested indoor-urban-rural environments at a regional level (e.g., a city and surrounding rural area). (Module 3) A food web bioaccumulation module simulates the accumulation of a chemical in aquatic (e.g., fish) and terrestrial organisms (e.g., beef cattle, milk cattle, swine, poultry) from the ambient environment and their own food, as well as resulting concentrations in their tissues. Notably, if livestock or domesticated animals are simulated, these organisms eventually become foodstuff on our dining tables. (Module 4) A human exposure and toxicokinetic module simulates time-variant human exposure to the chemical via multiple exposure pathways (dietary ingestion, drinking water ingestion, soil ingestion, inhalation of outdoor air, inhalation of indoor air, mouthing-mediated ingestion, and dermal absorption) from near- and far-field environments, as well as resulting concentrations in the body and bodily fluids (blood, serum, urine, and mother milk). 
Compared to existing chemical assessment models, PROTEX offers three key advantages. First, its modular framework allows the output of one module to serve as the input for the next. These modules can be run together to offer an integrated, cradle-to-grave chemical assessment, i.e., consistent with the “aggregate exposure pathway” concept; they can also be run independently to investigate specific problems related to chemical emissions, fate and transport, contamination levels, food web bioaccumulation, exposure and toxicokinetics. Second, the mechanistic design of PROTEX sets it apart from statistical “black-box” approaches by offering a transparent, “glass-box” structure grounded in (1) the principles of mass balance and (2) mechanistic descriptions of the physical, chemical, biological, toxicokinetic, and socioeconomic processes governing a chemical’s behavior. Finally, PROTEX is generic, meaning it can be parameterized for a wide variety of chemical substances, geographic settings, and human populations, provided the necessary high-quality input data are available.
PROTEX requires four categories of user input data: (1) chemical properties, which describe a chemical’s inherent behaviors of partitioning, reactivity, and mass transfer, (2) consumer product characteristics, which describe how consumer products containing the chemical are used and how the chemical is released during the manufacturing, use, and disposal of the consumer products, (3) environmental characteristics, which describe the relevant land-use, geographic, meteorological, hydrological, and environmental reactivity conditions of the target environment, and (4) anthropometric and demographic characteristics, which can be used to compute the modeled individual’s growth, physiology, behavior, and variability in clearance processes. 
In previous publications, PROTEX has been applied to a broad range of chemical substances, including pesticides, flame retardants, cleaning agents, chemicals used in electronics and electrical equipment, plasticizers, and emissions associated with smoking. Simulations have encompassed chemical fate and transport in both indoor and outdoor environments across multiple regions, including the United States, Canada, the West Baltic Basin, and China. The model has also been used to evaluate exposure and toxicokinetics for populations in the United States (across different racial and ethnic groups), Canada, Sweden, China, and Korea. Model predictions have been evaluated against environmental measurements and biomonitoring data. Such independent comparisons provide a basis for confidence in interpreting the model outputs within the scope of the underlying assumptions.

## Module 1
The Technosphere module tracks the “social life” of a chemical at three lifecycle stages: industrial processes (i.e., manufacturing or processing of chemicals and related consumer products), product use (i.e., chemicals “at work” within consumer articles), end-of-life waste management. It uses substance flow analysis to convert economic data, such as production and import volumes, into rates of chemicals released into the multimedia environment. The module is built on the principle of mass balance, which states that the amount of a chemical present in a lifecycle stage at any given time reflects a balance between the rates of the chemical amount entering and leaving the lifecycle stage. Specifically, emissions from industrial processes are calculated as directly proportional to the total amount of chemical produced or imported, with user-supplied specific emission factors as the proportional factors. Emissions from product use are calculated as directly proportional to the size of the “in-use stock” (i.e., the total chemical mass currently residing in homes or infrastructure). PROTEX uses a lifespan distribution (e.g., a Weibull or normal distribution) to predict how long a chemical remains trapped in each type of consumer product, i.e., the “time lag” between a product’s purchase and the eventual release of the chemical into the environment. Emissions from end-of-life waste management are calculated as directly proportional to the size of the “waste stock” (i.e., the total chemical mass currently residing in landfills or dumps), which is further calculated based on the user-supplied chemical degradation half-life in waste disposal facilities.

## Module 2
The Environmental Fate and Transport module uses a nested, multi-scale framework to track the migration of chemicals from their point of release to their eventual environmental “sinks” in three scales of environment: (1) the indoor space, (2) a populated area substantially impacted by human activities with intensive chemical use or release (e.g., an urban or suburban environment), and (3) the surrounding area (e.g., an exurban and rural environment, including countryside and agricultural lands). Within each scale, the environment is divided into multiple “compartments” that act as chemical reservoirs. For example, the indoor environment includes indoor air and various surfaces (including soft porous carpets, rigid impermeable floors, hard contact surfaces, and walls/ceilings). The urban environment includes air and various artificial and natural surfaces (including vegetation, soil, built-up surfaces such as pavement and buildings, freshwater, freshwater sediment, and shallow and deep groundwater). The rural environment includes air and various natural surfaces (including vegetation, soil, freshwater, freshwater sediment, estuarine water, estuarine sediment, and shallow and deep groundwater). To characterize these compartments, PROTEX requires users to input land-use, geographic, hydrological, meteorological, and environmental reactivity data. Users can exclude one or more environmental compartments from the model by setting their surface areas to zero. For each scale of environment, PROTEX establishes the physical “scaffolding” of the environment through built-in balance algorithms, e.g., air balance, water balance, aerosol/dust balance, and organic matter balance. For example, PROTEX models the continuous movement of water through the hydrologic cycle, e.g., precipitation, evapotranspiration, plant uptake, surface runoff, groundwater recharge and discharge, and the lateral flow of water through river networks and aquifers. PROTEX also models aerosol/dust balance by considering processes, e.g., aerosol emissions, entry of outdoor particles into the indoor environment via infiltration, gravitational settling onto surfaces, resuspension, and cleaning related particle removal, for different particle sizes (<0.02, 0.02-0.1, 0.1-1, 1-2.5, 2.5-10, 10-150, and >150 um). PROTEX allows users to input direct chemical emissions into one or more environmental compartments. Based on underlying balances, PROTEX calculates (1) inter-compartmental transport is driven by advection (one-way transport via bulk compartmental movement) and diffusion (two-way exchange driven by chemical fugacity gradients) and (2) permanently removal from the modeling system through natural degradation (biodegradation, photolysis, or hydrolysis) across all scales and artificial removal, such as cleaning and vacuuming, in the indoor scale. For example, a chemical in the indoor air may be advected from indoor air to outdoor air via ventilation, diffuse between the air and the carpet surface, and simultaneously undergo reactions with the hydroxyl radical and ozone in the gaseous phase. For example, a chemical in the urban air may be advected by wind currents into the surrounding rural air, diffuse across the air-water interface of urban freshwater bodies, stick to built-up surfaces, and undergo reactions with hydroxyl radicals in the urban atmosphere. PROTEX quantifies the rates of advection, diffusion, and removal by considering the chemical’s partitioning, reactivity, and mass transfer properties. For example, PROTEX calculates chemical removal via dust cleaning from an indoor surface by integrating several determinants: the average cleaning frequency specific to that surface, the volume of dust available for removal, the efficiency of dust removal during cleaning events, and the fugacity capacity of the dust phase that reflects the compound’s thermodynamic tendency to partition into dust from air. Partitioning between any two environmental media (e.g., dust and air) is characterized by an environmentally relevant partition coefficient (e.g., the dust-air partition coefficient). Environmentally relevant partition coefficients are further computed using either poly-parameter linear free energy relationships (pp-LFERs) or expressed as single-parameter LFER (sp-LFER) functions of more fundamental partition coefficients among the water, octanol, and air phases (KOA, KOW, and/or KAW). PROTEX considers the variation of chemical properties with temperature. Note that PROTEX’s parameterization of all rates of advection, diffusion, and removal is based on monthly varied meteorological, hydrological, and environmental reactivity conditions over the course of a year. PROTEX integrates these rates into a series of coupled differential mass balance equations; for each compartment, the mass balance means that the amount of a chemical present in the compartment at any given time reflects a balance between the rates of the chemical amount entering and leaving the compartment. By solving these equations simultaneously, the model calculates the time-dependent dynamics of chemical concentrations in individual environmental compartments. 

## Module 3
The Food Web Bioaccumulation module simulates the time-variant accumulation of chemicals from the physical environment into biological receptors across diverse ecosystems. This module characterizes the food web by considering two distinct ecological scales: (1) an aquatic food web consisting of zooplankton and various trophic levels of fish and (2) a terrestrial food web consisting of vegetation, dairy cattle, beef cattle, broiler poultry, egg-laying poultry, and swine. Users can specify whether an organism resides in urban or rural areas, and whether it inhabits freshwater, terrestrial, or estuarine ecosystems. Within each scale, organisms are modeled as biological “compartments” that serve as chemical reservoirs. For each organism, PROTEX builds a physiological “scaffolding” using built-in biological balance algorithms, such as life-stage growth curves, feeding patterns, and childbearing. For example, the model simulates the life-course development of cattle and fish by accounting for age-dependent changes in body weight, lipid content, and feeding rates. Based on these data, PROTEX calculates the intake of chemicals from environmental compartments (air, water, and soil) and through predation. For example, for beef cattle, PROTEX calculates chemical intake from air by accounting for the animal’s breathing rate, the bulk concentration of the chemical in air, and the respiratory absorption efficiency. PROTEX calculates chemical intake via dietary ingestion by accounting for vegetation consumption rates, chemical concentrations in the vegetation, and the gastrointestinal absorption efficiency. The food web structure is customizable. Users can adjust feeding preferences (e.g., the percentage contribution of each prey species to total food intake) or exclude specific species to reflect local ecological conditions. In parallel, PROTEX simulates chemical elimination from organisms through metabolic biotransformation and excretion into air, water, and soil. If a particular excretion route is not relevant to a given organism (e.g., the air excretion route for aquatic organisms), it is treated as zero in the model. PROTEX quantifies the rates of uptake and elimination by considering the chemical’s partitioning properties, reactivity, and the organism’s physiological traits. For example, the rate of metabolic biotransformation is calculated by accounting for the chemical’s whole-body biotransformation half-life, an “effective” body volume, and a fugacity capacity that reflects the chemical’s overall tendency to partition among lipids, proteins, water, and air in the body. These biologically relevant partitioning behaviors are characterized by partition coefficients between lipids, proteins, water, and air, which, in turn, can be either computed using pp-LFERs or expressed as single-parameter LFER (sp-LFER) functions of more fundamental partition coefficients among the water, octanol, and air phases (KOA, KOW, and/or KAW). PROTEX also considers the variation of biological rates with environmental temperature, particularly for ectothermic species like fish. PROTEX integrates these rates into a series of coupled differential mass balance equations; for each organism, the mass balance ensures that the chemical body burden at any given time reflects the dynamic equilibrium between total intake and total elimination. By solving these equations simultaneously with the environmental fate module, PROTEX calculates the time-dependent dynamics of chemical concentrations in food items, providing the necessary input for the human exposure assessment.

## Module 4
The “Human Exposure and Toxicokinetic” module simulates the life-course, age-specific average daily dose rates (the mass of a chemical consumed per day, normalized by the bodyweight) and resulting concentration levels in the whole body (the mass of a chemical normalized by the body lipid content) and bodily fluids (e.g., plasma and urine).  
To characterize the modeled individual, PROTEX integrates built-in sex-specific algorithms that define the individual’s growth trajectory, i.e., age-dependent anthropometric profiles. PROTEX requires users to specify sex and fundamental anthropometric variables (body weight, standing height, and body fat percentage) at 25 years of age. These values serve as the physiological baseline for PROTEX’s extrapolation of age-dependent trajectories spanning 0 to 80 years. Furthermore, PROTEX integrates age-dependent algorithms to compute physiological parameters (e.g., glomerular filtration rate, organ blood flows), behavioral patterns (e.g., daily frequencies of hand-to-mouth contact, object-to-mouth contact, contact with indoor surfaces, handwashing, and bathing), and total intake rates of relevant exposure media (air, drinking water, soil particles, and food items; scaled from user-specified inputs at 25 years of age). This architecture ensures that age-dependent toxicokinetics and exposure are mechanistically coupled with physiology, behavior, and environmental context. Rather than stratifying by age categories, PROTEX resolves continuous life-course trajectories anchored to individual-specific baseline inputs.  PROTEX additionally requires users to define activity patterns, including fraction of time spent indoors, residence within an urban or rural regional scale, and whether drinking water is sourced from surface water or soil porewater. For females, users are also required to specify maternal descriptors, including age at childbearing, maximum gestational weight gain, birth weight of the infant, duration of breastfeeding. 
In the one-compartment module, the modeled individual is treated as a biological “compartment” that serves as a chemical reservoir. The individual is further treated as four phases: neutral lipid, phospholipid, protein, and water. The module considers three primary routes of chemical entry into the human body: inhalation (including indoor and outdoor air), oral ingestion (via diet, drinking water, soil particles, and mouthing-mediated behaviors indoors), and dermal absorption. For example, PROTEX calculates the rate of inhalation intake as the product of the modeled individual’s air breathing rate and the bulk concentration of the chemical in the air. PROTEX calculates dietary ingestion as the sum of the consumption rates of various food groups (e.g., meat, dairy, vegetables, fish) and drinking water, each multiplied by the chemical concentration in that specific medium (modeled by the Food-web Bioaccumulation Module). PROTEX calculates the rate of mouthing-mediated ingestion by accounting for frequencies of contact with carpet, flooring, and hard surfaces, frequency of mouthing (hand-to-mouth and object-to-mouth contact), the surface area of the hand/object, and the mass of dust and chemical residual transferred per contact. Users can specify exposure sources; for example, whether outdoor air is urban or rural, or whether drinking water is drawn from surface or groundwater, and from urban or rural systems. Built-in algorithms then simulate the route-specific fraction of a chemical that is absorbed into systemic circulation. In parallel, PROTEX simulates five routes of chemical elimination from the systemic circulation: metabolic biotransformation into downstream metabolites, renal excretion, fecal egestion, exhalation, and percutaneous excretion. For example, the rate of metabolic biotransformation is calculated by accounting for the chemical’s whole-body biotransformation half-life, an “effective” body volume, an age-specific correction factor to adjust for reduced metabolic capacity in individuals over 50, and a fugacity capacity that reflects the chemical’s overall tendency to partition among neutral storage lipids, phospholipids, proteins, and water in the body. These biologically relevant partitioning behaviors are characterized by partition coefficients between neutral lipid and water, phospholipid and water, and protein and water, which, in turn, can be either computed using pp-LFERs or expressed as sp-LFER functions of the chemical’s KOW. Similarly, renal excretion is calculated by accounting for the modeled individual’s glomerular filtration rate, a dimensionless factor representing the plasma-unbound fraction of the chemical, a scaling factor to capture the balance between tubular reabsorption and secretion, and the fugacity capacity. Similar to the metabolic biotransformation process, the fugacity capacity also reflects the chemical’s biologically relevant partitioning behaviors.  
PROTEX integrates these rates into a differential mass balance equation, where the amount of a chemical present in the systemic circulation at any given time reflects a balance between the rates of the chemical amount entering and leaving the systemic circulation. By solving this equation, the model calculates the time-dependent dynamics of chemical concentrations in the plasma and the whole body.  
